content/prepper.md, before:

---
title: "Prepper but Normal: How to Be Prepared and Not Be Weird"
created_at: 2024-08-23
updated_at: 2025-04-30
image:
  src: /calm/prepper/prepper.webp
  alt: Cans, prepper
language: cs
tags:
  - prepper
  - tutorial
  - how to
  - calm
---

For those who want to live normally even in abnormal times. Or just want to look normal.

- [Options](#options)
- [Physical things](#physical-things)
  - [Cash](#cash)
  - [More bank accounts](#more-bank-accounts)
  - [Crypto](#crypto)
  - [Precious metals](#precious-metals)
  - [More passports](#more-passports)
  - [Portable things](#portable-things)
  - [Emergency kit](#emergency-kit)
- [Intangible assets](#intangible-assets)
  - [Good relations](#good-relations)
  - [Soft skills: negotiation, communication skills, languages](#soft-skills-negotiation-communication-skills-languages)
  - [Hard skills: driving licence, gun licence, courses for life](#hard-skills-driving-licence-gun-licence-courses-for-life)
  - [Online services](#online-services)
- [Test](#test)
- [Behave normal](#behave-normal)
- [Sources](#sources)
  - [Books](#books)
  - [On prepperism in general](#on-prepperism-in-general)
  - [Specific](#specific)
- [Specific (but in Czech)](#specific-but-in-czech)

When we choose something, we don't always consider what option is the best for a rainy day. We don't have to be preppers right away to think about the additional benefits that each option has in marginal situations. (Preppers are people who prepare for the worst. Some are even weird and paranoid.)

This text is for people who want to live the same way they have been living. But at the same time be a little better prepared.

## Options

Optionality gives a person options but not obligations. Often the extra cost is negligible. Taleb popularised this.

It can be anything. Like buying another bus ticket with a different departure time with an option to cancel one of them for free 15 minutes before departure. You can choose which one you will use lately. The cost is time and the forfeited price of the ticket if one doesn't have time to cancel.

I show options where adding more options costs almost nothing. And often it beats the "normal" choice.

I don't go to extremes. Having an underground bunker is a different discipline. The advice here is compatible with a normal person's life.

But I add more extreme versions as well. I know people for whom the extreme version is a passion and would find themselves in it.

It's not a checklist. It's an inspiration.

## Physical things

### Cash

> Normal version: cash in the currency I use plus some EUR/USD
>
> Extreme version: the whole palette from SDR

> Advantages: reduced risk when preferred currency fails (if you have multiple currencies); liquidity (cash-only businesses); less spending; anonymity
>
> Extra costs: weight of cash; exchange rate risk; impossibility of certain financial operations (interest on deposits); custody security measures

Compared to a regular card/transfer payment, it actually has many advantages:

- Cash people generally spend less
- No hidden (card) fees allow the business to get the full amount
  - Theoretically it doesn't mind giving a lower tip because it goes off the record, win-win
- Anonymity

The money in the account is only a claim to the bank. Even though they are insured in Europe up to €100'000, if one needs to withdraw something from an ATM during a crisis, one will struggle to withdraw anything.

Because of the impossibility of financial transactions (inability to earn interest on cash), it only makes sense to have a spendable amount of cash. However, this must also be enough for the individual or the dependents (family, friends) to get to safe place.

It is important to have foreign currencies. In the event of a system failure, the currency you normally pay with may be worthless. A good inspiration for choosing a foreign currency in my opinion is the Special Drawing Rights (SDR). It is an international unit of account made up of USD, EUR, JPY, GBP and CNY. With the exception of the Chinese Renminbi, these currencies are exchangeable everywhere. At worse (at best?) spend them them while being on holiday abroad.

### More bank accounts

> Normal version: many bank accounts
>
> Extreme version: distribution across jurisdictions and entities

> Advantages: increase availability of funds
>
> Extra costs: cost of administration.

Helpful not only during major disasters. Most of the time, there will be small crashes like a bank service outage. It's always handy to have a backup card or another account just in case.

An extreme option may be to open an account abroad. In Georgia, for example, it's easy to set up an account. Both Revolut and Wise do a nice multi-currency account in Europe.

### Crypto

> Normal version: bitcoin on lightning network, maybe stablecoins
>
> Extreme version: hardware wallet and anonymous coins (Monero)

> Advantages: similar to cash; better portability of larger amounts.
>
> Extra costs: Higher volatility; need to understand (especially the definite loss in bad custody)

Learning how to use cryptocurrencies is a useful thing itself. There is no need to learn whole complexity or go into detail.

It will be enough to play around with bitcoin (ideally on a lightning network) or stablecoins (cryptocurrencies pegged 1:1 to fiat e.g. USD).

A more extreme version might be to buy privacy coins like Monero. Or buy more and leave some of that in a hardware wallet.

### Precious metals

> Normal version: a nice piece of jewellery, low carat
>
> Extreme version: real gold jewelry; physical commodities

> Benefits: Diversification
>
> Extra costs: transaction costs for buying and selling; storage; poorer portability

In case crisis hits there will be no time to find out how many karats your gold has. Even if there is, it's good to have a smaller piece of jewelry that can be quickly exchanged for food (like a small "change"). With a gold coin, one may accept less advantageous transaction under the time pressure.

For long term holdings and for larger portfolios, it makes sense to hold a certain amount of metal as a kind of hedge against the system, inflation and to reduce overall portfolio risk.

### More passports

> Normal version: multiple physical passports of the same country
>
> Extreme version: multiple citizenships, no permanent residence, temporary stays

> Benefits: flexibility multiplied
>
> Extra costs: cost of passport; possible additional legislative burden

Having multiple passports of one country is a legal and normal thing for many. You may need to give a reason while requesting but it can be anything from "running out of space" to "there's a stamp of a country that doesn't like the country I want to go to". Ideally order second passport later so that it expires at different time.

In the case of a proper prepper, other citizenships can be considered. It can be bought by investment (buying government bonds, real estate) or domestication. A lighter version is applying for temporary residency.

Some version of the "in-between" is still the option of not having permanent residence at all, only temporary. One cannot vote in local elections and may not take a loan then. Or maybe you need to visa run then.

### Portable things

> Normal version: Buy portable versions of products
>
> Extreme versions: Having only negligible possessions in things you are unable to take away quickly

> Benefits: increased utility (use even during traveling), mobility
>
> Extra costs: less options, possibly lower functionality/comfort, possibly price

If there is a travel alternative, buy it. Computer -> Laptop. Even things like router have travel versions. And regarding already portable stuff, you can "upgrade" them to a lighter version as well.

Honestly, this is a bit of an antiadvice, as with portable stuff the potential advantage (portability) is often proportionally compensated by price or comfort. A laptop versus a computer with the same performance score is more expensive, plus the ergonomics at work are significantly worse. In addition, mini computers with a decent performance already have the dimensions of tablets.

But it may still make sense to upgrade already portable things with more portable ones, i.e. buy lighter variants at a higher price. Many of those things must be a higher quality.

### Emergency kit

> Normal version: Can food, water supplies/water filters for daily use, first aid kit in car, raincoat, flashlights, batteries, power banks
>
> Extreme version: extreme amount of food, cigarettes and bullets; emergency kit, disaster supplies (radio), own power source (solar panels)

> Advantages: Durability
>
> Cost: Storage space

While this seems beyond "normal" to a lot of people, natural disasters worldwide show that being materially prepared for an emergency may not be as unlikely as it may seem at first glance.

There is the golden trinity of the prepper "cigarettes, canned goods and bullets". The most versatile are canned goods. The extreme version is havind all three prepared. Especially if you don't smoke. The additional cost of canned is zero, at worst one gets away with it.

However, there are many more things that come in handy in a pinch. As Bárta (2021, p. 259) writes in The Seven Laws (Sedm zákonů):

> Some countries, such as Sweden and Germany, have manuals for their citizens, urging them to keep a few days' emergency supplies at home at all times. These include, of course, a few litres of drinking water per person per day, non-perishable foodstuffs, food that can be eaten without cooking, sugar, coffee, tea, biscuits, chocolate, preserves and preserves, garbage bags, disinfectant, water disinfectant tablets, a power adapter for the car, a small gas cooker, candles, a battery-operated radio, a flashlight, basic common medicines, bandages, sleeping bags, head torches, ideally a small generator and naturally a supply of fuel in a canister, normal cash for at least three days and some others.

Water filtration equipment is also useful, either in the form of filters under the sink directly connected to the water, or a kettle with a filtration kit (e.g. Brita). In the event of a water outage, you can get by for a while without having to buy bottled water. Additionally, Georgia has trained me to stock water heavily.

And it's not just a Georgian thing. Even Japanese (extreme) minimalists keep barrels of water as their property. Because of less stuff, minimalists have to think about more possible situations and prepare for them. They can avoid disaster not only because their ability to move fast, but also by being prepared from previous more "normal" life event.

## Intangible assets

### Good relations

> Normal version: Maintain relationships including more distant ones (less important friends, friends of friends)
>
> Extreme version: Increase the amount of relationships to the widest possible range, have kids

> Benefits: better life in general
>
> Extra costs: possible fragmentation of relationships, time

Having good relationships opens doors. It is something we don't often think of as an asset. After all, it's the people and our immediate surroundings. But in the end, it's a wonderful source of enrichment in life, and it's mutual.

There are plenty of options, from casual socialising, through catching up with friends on social media, to wishing them happy birthday. The cost is low, often immediately rewarding, and the potential benefits are unquantifiable.

### Soft skills: negotiation, communication skills, languages

> Normal version: consume valuable content, educate yourself
>
> Extreme version: unnecessary immersion in low probability problems, social engineering

> Benefits: Better life in general
>
> Additional cost: Annoyance with the green bird who recalls to do your Spanish lesson again

To build valuable relationships, it is also important to bring value to others and know how to get it when needed. It's a kind of necessary complement to a good life - to be able to make the most of life, we need to be able to recognize and use these opportunities.

In addition to various YT videos, Duolingo, books, and more, it's useful to simply try (and yes, fail).

### Hard skills: driving licence, gun licence, courses for life

> Normal version: Courses that I will use in normal life (e.g. cooking)
>
> Extreme version: Courses I won't use every day, but could (survival courses)

> Advantages: Optionality, ability to get into new life situations
>
> Extra costs: time, cost

Same as with soft skills.

### Online services

> Normal version: try VPN, Tor, encrypted communication, cryptocurrency payments
>
> Extreme version: Excessive use without added benefit

> Benefit: Ability to use alternatives before needing them (when it's too late)
>
> Extra costs: cost of services, convenience, time

It is useful to learn some things before they are needed. Then one is often stressed even because one doesn't fully know what one is doing. Change a tyre. Eating with chopsticks. Pay with a new payment method. Use a VPN. Ask the AI correctly.

This section can be applied to a wide range of services and knowledge. The main focus here is the online space just because we spend a lot of time on it, it's changing a lot and expanding rapidly. New services may be a useful tool for greater personal freedom in a few years.

## Test

Try a few things while skies are blue,
before the storms come chasing you:

- Not going to the store for a week, not even for baked goods (to identify weak spots in the stockpile)
- Turn off your main breaker for an hour (simulate an outage), cell phone, internet
- Turn off the water
- Prepare to be unable to refuel

The ideas are not mine, I'll leave them out in the interest of maintaining the privacy of the resource.

## Behave normal

And one more controversial thing at the end.

Rule 38 in _48 Laws of Power_ says: Think As You Like, But Behave Like Others.

The strategy is to fit into the definition of normalcy. The target of attack has historically been people who stood out in any way. The way to greater anonymity may be to not stand out (on paper) rather than rebel. An empty excel cell is more suspicious than an average value.

---

## Sources

### Books

- BÁRTA, Miroslav. Sedm zákonů. Brno: JOTA, 2021. ISBN 978-80-7565-640-7.
- GREENE, Robert. The 48 laws of power. London: Profile Books, 1998. ISBN 1-86197-139-7.

### On prepperism in general

### Specific

- [Special drawing rights](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special_drawing_rights)
- [Get your visa](https://visadb.io/)
- [Emergency kit inspiration](https://theprepared.com/bug-out-bags/guides/bug-out-bag-list/)
- [Emergency kit of an extreme minimalist](https://youtu.be/XBQBKseozuY?feature=shared&t=269)

## Specific (but in Czech)

- [Why cash is necessary](https://youtu.be/-yGFps9MFQ0)
- [How to survive](https://www.pavlinaspeaks.com/blog/jakprezit)
- [Preppers web](http://www.prepper.cz/)
- [Rozpad (decay) forum](https://rozpad.cz)
- [Why a low-carat jewel makes sense and a gold bar does not](https://www.seznamzpravy.cz/clanek/audio-podcast-ve-vate-cekam-vaznou-recesi-zlate-cihly-vas-ale-nezachrani-varuje-investor-217710)
- [The meaning of investing in relationships](https://youtu.be/QU2K6XEnA0I)
- [Networking](https://youtu.be/QU2K6XEnA0I)

Commit message:

docs(content): add crisis preparation link to prepper articles

content/prepper.md, after:

---
title: 'Prepper but Normal: How to Be Prepared and Not Be Weird'
created_at: 2024-08-23
updated_at: 2025-04-30
image:
  src: /calm/prepper/prepper.webp
  alt: Cans, prepper
language: cs
tags:
  - prepper
  - tutorial
  - how to
  - calm
---

For those who want to live normally even in abnormal times. Or just want to look normal.

- [Options](#options)
- [Physical things](#physical-things)
  - [Cash](#cash)
  - [More bank accounts](#more-bank-accounts)
  - [Crypto](#crypto)
  - [Precious metals](#precious-metals)
  - [More passports](#more-passports)
  - [Portable things](#portable-things)
  - [Emergency kit](#emergency-kit)
- [Intangible assets](#intangible-assets)
  - [Good relations](#good-relations)
  - [Soft skills: negotiation, communication skills, languages](#soft-skills-negotiation-communication-skills-languages)
  - [Hard skills: driving licence, gun licence, courses for life](#hard-skills-driving-licence-gun-licence-courses-for-life)
  - [Online services](#online-services)
- [Test](#test)
- [Behave normal](#behave-normal)
- [Sources](#sources)
  - [Books](#books)
  - [On prepperism in general](#on-prepperism-in-general)
  - [Specific](#specific)
- [Specific (but in Czech)](#specific-but-in-czech)

When we choose something, we don't always consider what option is the best for a rainy day. We don't have to be preppers right away to think about the additional benefits that each option has in marginal situations. (Preppers are people who prepare for the worst. Some are even weird and paranoid.)

This text is for people who want to live the same way they have been living. But at the same time be a little better prepared.

## Options

Optionality gives a person options but not obligations. Often the extra cost is negligible. Taleb popularised this.

It can be anything. Like buying another bus ticket with a different departure time with an option to cancel one of them for free 15 minutes before departure. You can choose which one you will use lately. The cost is time and the forfeited price of the ticket if one doesn't have time to cancel.

I show options where adding more options costs almost nothing. And often it beats the "normal" choice.

I don't go to extremes. Having an underground bunker is a different discipline. The advice here is compatible with a normal person's life.

But I add more extreme versions as well. I know people for whom the extreme version is a passion and would find themselves in it.

It's not a checklist. It's an inspiration.

## Physical things

### Cash

> Normal version: cash in the currency I use plus some EUR/USD
>
> Extreme version: the whole palette from SDR

> Advantages: reduced risk when preferred currency fails (if you have multiple currencies); liquidity (cash-only businesses); less spending; anonymity
>
> Extra costs: weight of cash; exchange rate risk; impossibility of certain financial operations (interest on deposits); custody security measures

Compared to a regular card/transfer payment, it actually has many advantages:

- Cash people generally spend less
- No hidden (card) fees allow the business to get the full amount
  - Theoretically it doesn't mind giving a lower tip because it goes off the record, win-win
- Anonymity

The money in the account is only a claim to the bank. Even though they are insured in Europe up to €100'000, if one needs to withdraw something from an ATM during a crisis, one will struggle to withdraw anything.

Because of the impossibility of financial transactions (inability to earn interest on cash), it only makes sense to have a spendable amount of cash. However, this must also be enough for the individual or the dependents (family, friends) to get to safe place.

It is important to have foreign currencies. In the event of a system failure, the currency you normally pay with may be worthless. A good inspiration for choosing a foreign currency in my opinion is the Special Drawing Rights (SDR). It is an international unit of account made up of USD, EUR, JPY, GBP and CNY. With the exception of the Chinese Renminbi, these currencies are exchangeable everywhere. At worse (at best?) spend them them while being on holiday abroad.

### More bank accounts

> Normal version: many bank accounts
>
> Extreme version: distribution across jurisdictions and entities

> Advantages: increase availability of funds
>
> Extra costs: cost of administration.

Helpful not only during major disasters. Most of the time, there will be small crashes like a bank service outage. It's always handy to have a backup card or another account just in case.

An extreme option may be to open an account abroad. In Georgia, for example, it's easy to set up an account. Both Revolut and Wise do a nice multi-currency account in Europe.

### Crypto

> Normal version: bitcoin on lightning network, maybe stablecoins
>
> Extreme version: hardware wallet and anonymous coins (Monero)

> Advantages: similar to cash; better portability of larger amounts.
>
> Extra costs: Higher volatility; need to understand (especially the definite loss in bad custody)

Learning how to use cryptocurrencies is a useful thing itself. There is no need to learn whole complexity or go into detail.

It will be enough to play around with bitcoin (ideally on a lightning network) or stablecoins (cryptocurrencies pegged 1:1 to fiat e.g. USD).

A more extreme version might be to buy privacy coins like Monero. Or buy more and leave some of that in a hardware wallet.

### Precious metals

> Normal version: a nice piece of jewellery, low carat
>
> Extreme version: real gold jewelry; physical commodities

> Benefits: Diversification
>
> Extra costs: transaction costs for buying and selling; storage; poorer portability

In case crisis hits there will be no time to find out how many karats your gold has. Even if there is, it's good to have a smaller piece of jewelry that can be quickly exchanged for food (like a small "change"). With a gold coin, one may accept less advantageous transaction under the time pressure.

For long term holdings and for larger portfolios, it makes sense to hold a certain amount of metal as a kind of hedge against the system, inflation and to reduce overall portfolio risk.

### More passports

> Normal version: multiple physical passports of the same country
>
> Extreme version: multiple citizenships, no permanent residence, temporary stays

> Benefits: flexibility multiplied
>
> Extra costs: cost of passport; possible additional legislative burden

Having multiple passports of one country is a legal and normal thing for many. You may need to give a reason while requesting but it can be anything from "running out of space" to "there's a stamp of a country that doesn't like the country I want to go to". Ideally order second passport later so that it expires at different time.

In the case of a proper prepper, other citizenships can be considered. It can be bought by investment (buying government bonds, real estate) or domestication. A lighter version is applying for temporary residency.

Some version of the "in-between" is still the option of not having permanent residence at all, only temporary. One cannot vote in local elections and may not take a loan then. Or maybe you need to visa run then.

### Portable things

> Normal version: Buy portable versions of products
>
> Extreme versions: Having only negligible possessions in things you are unable to take away quickly

> Benefits: increased utility (use even during traveling), mobility
>
> Extra costs: less options, possibly lower functionality/comfort, possibly price

If there is a travel alternative, buy it. Computer -> Laptop. Even things like router have travel versions. And regarding already portable stuff, you can "upgrade" them to a lighter version as well.

Honestly, this is a bit of an antiadvice, as with portable stuff the potential advantage (portability) is often proportionally compensated by price or comfort. A laptop versus a computer with the same performance score is more expensive, plus the ergonomics at work are significantly worse. In addition, mini computers with a decent performance already have the dimensions of tablets.

But it may still make sense to upgrade already portable things with more portable ones, i.e. buy lighter variants at a higher price. Many of those things must be a higher quality.

### Emergency kit

> Normal version: Can food, water supplies/water filters for daily use, first aid kit in car, raincoat, flashlights, batteries, power banks
>
> Extreme version: extreme amount of food, cigarettes and bullets; emergency kit, disaster supplies (radio), own power source (solar panels)

> Advantages: Durability
>
> Cost: Storage space

While this seems beyond "normal" to a lot of people, natural disasters worldwide show that being materially prepared for an emergency may not be as unlikely as it may seem at first glance.

There is the golden trinity of the prepper "cigarettes, canned goods and bullets". The most versatile are canned goods. The extreme version is havind all three prepared. Especially if you don't smoke. The additional cost of canned is zero, at worst one gets away with it.

However, there are many more things that come in handy in a pinch. As Bárta (2021, p. 259) writes in The Seven Laws (Sedm zákonů):

> Some countries, such as Sweden and Germany, have manuals for their citizens, urging them to keep a few days' emergency supplies at home at all times. These include, of course, a few litres of drinking water per person per day, non-perishable foodstuffs, food that can be eaten without cooking, sugar, coffee, tea, biscuits, chocolate, preserves and preserves, garbage bags, disinfectant, water disinfectant tablets, a power adapter for the car, a small gas cooker, candles, a battery-operated radio, a flashlight, basic common medicines, bandages, sleeping bags, head torches, ideally a small generator and naturally a supply of fuel in a canister, normal cash for at least three days and some others.

Water filtration equipment is also useful, either in the form of filters under the sink directly connected to the water, or a kettle with a filtration kit (e.g. Brita). In the event of a water outage, you can get by for a while without having to buy bottled water. Additionally, Georgia has trained me to stock water heavily.

And it's not just a Georgian thing. Even Japanese (extreme) minimalists keep barrels of water as their property. Because of less stuff, minimalists have to think about more possible situations and prepare for them. They can avoid disaster not only because their ability to move fast, but also by being prepared from previous more "normal" life event.

## Intangible assets

### Good relations

> Normal version: Maintain relationships including more distant ones (less important friends, friends of friends)
>
> Extreme version: Increase the amount of relationships to the widest possible range, have kids

> Benefits: better life in general
>
> Extra costs: possible fragmentation of relationships, time

Having good relationships opens doors. It is something we don't often think of as an asset. After all, it's the people and our immediate surroundings. But in the end, it's a wonderful source of enrichment in life, and it's mutual.

There are plenty of options, from casual socialising, through catching up with friends on social media, to wishing them happy birthday. The cost is low, often immediately rewarding, and the potential benefits are unquantifiable.

### Soft skills: negotiation, communication skills, languages

> Normal version: consume valuable content, educate yourself
>
> Extreme version: unnecessary immersion in low probability problems, social engineering

> Benefits: Better life in general
>
> Additional cost: Annoyance with the green bird who recalls to do your Spanish lesson again

To build valuable relationships, it is also important to bring value to others and know how to get it when needed. It's a kind of necessary complement to a good life - to be able to make the most of life, we need to be able to recognize and use these opportunities.

In addition to various YT videos, Duolingo, books, and more, it's useful to simply try (and yes, fail).

### Hard skills: driving licence, gun licence, courses for life

> Normal version: Courses that I will use in normal life (e.g. cooking)
>
> Extreme version: Courses I won't use every day, but could (survival courses)

> Advantages: Optionality, ability to get into new life situations
>
> Extra costs: time, cost

Same as with soft skills.

### Online services

> Normal version: try VPN, Tor, encrypted communication, cryptocurrency payments
>
> Extreme version: Excessive use without added benefit

> Benefit: Ability to use alternatives before needing them (when it's too late)
>
> Extra costs: cost of services, convenience, time

It is useful to learn some things before they are needed. Then one is often stressed even because one doesn't fully know what one is doing. Change a tyre. Eating with chopsticks. Pay with a new payment method. Use a VPN. Ask the AI correctly.

This section can be applied to a wide range of services and knowledge. The main focus here is the online space just because we spend a lot of time on it, it's changing a lot and expanding rapidly. New services may be a useful tool for greater personal freedom in a few years.

## Test

Try a few things while skies are blue,
before the storms come chasing you:

- Not going to the store for a week, not even for baked goods (to identify weak spots in the stockpile)
- Turn off your main breaker for an hour (simulate an outage), cell phone, internet
- Turn off the water
- Prepare to be unable to refuel

The ideas are not mine, I'll leave them out in the interest of maintaining the privacy of the resource.

## Behave normal

And one more controversial thing at the end.

Rule 38 in _48 Laws of Power_ says: Think As You Like, But Behave Like Others.

The strategy is to fit into the definition of normalcy. The target of attack has historically been people who stood out in any way. The way to greater anonymity may be to not stand out (on paper) rather than rebel. An empty excel cell is more suspicious than an average value.

---

## Sources

### Books

- BÁRTA, Miroslav. Sedm zákonů. Brno: JOTA, 2021. ISBN 978-80-7565-640-7.
- GREENE, Robert. The 48 laws of power. London: Profile Books, 1998. ISBN 1-86197-139-7.

### On prepperism in general

### Specific

- [Special drawing rights](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special_drawing_rights)
- [Get your visa](https://visadb.io/)
- [Emergency kit inspiration](https://theprepared.com/bug-out-bags/guides/bug-out-bag-list/)
- [Emergency kit of an extreme minimalist](https://youtu.be/XBQBKseozuY?feature=shared&t=269)
- [How to Prepare for Crisis Situations and Overcome Them Together - Czech government](https://www.72h.gov.cz/en/download)

## Specific (but in Czech)

- [Why cash is necessary](https://youtu.be/-yGFps9MFQ0)
- [How to survive](https://www.pavlinaspeaks.com/blog/jakprezit)
- [Preppers web](http://www.prepper.cz/)
- [Rozpad (decay) forum](https://rozpad.cz)
- [Why a low-carat jewel makes sense and a gold bar does not](https://www.seznamzpravy.cz/clanek/audio-podcast-ve-vate-cekam-vaznou-recesi-zlate-cihly-vas-ale-nezachrani-varuje-investor-217710)
- [The meaning of investing in relationships](https://youtu.be/QU2K6XEnA0I)
- [Networking](https://youtu.be/QU2K6XEnA0I)
